---
layout: post
categories : publications
tagline: "."
tags : publication
e: How hard does mutation analysis have to be, anyway? 
title: How hard does mutation analysis have to be, anyway?
authors: Rahul Gopinath, Amin Alipour, Iftekhar Ahmed, Carlos Jensen, Alex Groce
venue: IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE)
kind: conference
thesort: peerreviewed
peerreviewed: yes
---

Mutation analysis is considered the best method for
measuring the adequacy of test suites. However, the number of
test runs required for a full mutation analysis grows faster than
project size, which is not feasible for real-world software projects,
which often have more than a million lines of code. It is for
projects of this size, however, that developers most need a method
for evaluating the efficacy of a test suite. Various strategies have
been proposed to deal with the explosion of mutants. However,
these strategies at best reduce the number of mutants required to
a fraction of overall mutants, which still grows with program size.
Running, e.g., 5% of all mutants of a 2MLOC program usually
requires analyzing over 100,000 mutants. Similarly, while various
approaches have been proposed to tackle equivalent mutants,
none completely eliminate the problem, and the fraction of
equivalent mutants remaining is hard to estimate, often requiring
manual analysis of equivalence.

In this paper, we provide both theoretical analysis and
empirical evidence that a small constant sample of mutants yields
statistically similar results to running a full mutation analysis,
regardless of the size of the program or similarity between
mutants. We show that a similar approach, using a constant
sample of inputs can estimate the degree of stubbornness in
mutants remaining to a high degree of statistical confidence,
and provide a mutation analysis framework for Python that
incorporates the analysis of stubbornness of mutants.

##### Updates:

* One can simplify, and reach our conclusions in this paper by noting
that, theory of random sampling only requires randomness in the sample
selection, and not in the population. That is, even if the population
contains strongly correlated variables, so long as the sampling procedure
is random, one can expect the sample to obey statistical laws. In
particular, the correlatedness of the mutants results in same mean, but
lesser variance than if we were sampling from a set of mutants that were
independent of each other.
<!-- need to check _Extension of the law of large numbers to quantities, depending on each other_ by (Markov 1906) --> 
* Further, we recommend that one should sample at least 9,604 mutants
for 99% precision 95% of the time, as suggested by theory for independent
mutants simply because it is the pessimistic upper bound, and it should
be used for research.

<!--script async class="speakerdeck-embed" data-id="3a16618236ad4f91b253a9f70b3cbe9b" data-ratio="1.33333333333333" src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script-->

[<em class="fa fa-book fa-lg" aria-hidden="true"></em>](/resources/issre2015/gopinath2015howhard.pdf "paper")
[<em class="fa fa-bookmark-o fa-lg" aria-hidden="true"></em>](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rahulgopinath/rahulgopinath.github.io/master/resources/issre2015/gopinath2015howhard.bib "reference")
[<em class="fa fa-database fa-lg" aria-hidden="true"></em>](https://dx.doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/MYDH2 "data")
[<em class="fa fa-desktop" aria-hidden="true"></em>](https://speakerdeck.com/rahulgopinath/how-hard-does-mutation-analysis-have-to-be-anyway "presentation")

