---
layout: post
categories : publications
tagline: "."
tags : publication
e: Does choice of mutation tool matter? 
title: Does choice of mutation tool matter?
authors: Rahul Gopinath, Iftekhar Ahmed, Mohammad Amin Alipour, Carlos Jensen, Alex Groce
venue: Software Quality Journal
kind: journal
thesort: peerreviewed
peerreviewed: yes
---

Mutation analysis is the primary means of evaluating the quality of
test suites, though it suffers from inadequate standardization. Mutation
analysis tools vary based on language, when mutants are generated (phase
of compilation), and target audience. Mutation tools rarely implement the
complete set of operators proposed in the literature, and most implement at
least a few domain-specific mutation operators. Thus different tools may not
always agree on the mutant kills of a test suite, and few criteria exist
to guide a practitioner in choosing a tool, or a researcher in comparing
previous results. We investigate an ensemble of measures such as traditional
difficulty of detection, strength of minimal sets, diversity of mutants,
as well as the information carried by the mutants produced , to evaluate
the efficacy of mutant sets. By these measures, mutation tools rarely agree,
often with large differences, and the variation due to project, even after
accounting for difference due to test suites, is significant. However,
the mean difference between tools is very small indicating that no single
tool consistently skews mutation scores high or low for all projects. These
results suggest that research using a single tool, a small number of projects,
or small increments in mutation score may not yield reliable results. There
is a clear need for greater standardization of mutation analysis; we propose
one approach for such a standardization.

##### Updates:

(Thanks to [Darko Marinov](http://mir.cs.illinois.edu/marinov/), [Farah Hariri](http://mir.cs.illinois.edu/farah/), [August Shi](http://mir.cs.illinois.edu/awshi2/), Muhammad Mahmood, and Warnakulasuriya Fernando)

* The *surface mutants* in this paper is actually the *minimal mutants* from Ammann et al. ([Ammann 2014](/references#ammann2014establishing)), and the *disjoint mutants* from Kintis et al. ([Kintis 2010](/references#kintis2010evaluating)). The *minimal mutants* in this paper
starts by minimizing the test suite, and hence different from *minimal mutants* from Ammann et al.
* The definition of *mutation subsumption* in the paper is flipped. That is, a
mutant dynamically subsumes another if all test cases that kills the *former* is guaranteed
to kill the *later*, and the mutant is killed by the test suite.

[<em class="fa fa-book fa-lg" aria-hidden="true"></em>](/resources/sqj2016/gopinath2016does.pdf "paper") <!--(http://rdcu.be/ut76)-->
[<em class="fa fa-bookmark-o fa-lg" aria-hidden="true"></em>](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rahulgopinath/rahulgopinath.github.io/master/resources/sqj2016/gopinath2016does.bib "reference")
[<em class="fa fa-database fa-lg" aria-hidden="true"></em>](http://eecs.osuosl.org/rahul/sqj2016/ "data")

