[@
The fifth installment.
Our language has grown quite a bit. See the factorial definition in the initlib to see what it can do.

Our library now includes

Arithmetic + * - / > <
Boolean =? and or not
Predicates: odd? even? zero? empty?
Control Structures: if, if*
Definitions: .
Stack management:
    dup    | 1 2 3 dup == 1 2 3 3
    swap   | 1 2 3 swap == 1 3 2
    pop    | 1 2 3 pop  == 1 2
    cons   | 1 [2 3 4] cons == [1 2 3 4]
    concat | [1 2 3] [4 5 6] concat = [1 2 3 4 5]
    nwrap  | 1 2 3 4 5 2 nwrap == 1 2 3 [4 5]
           | 1 2 3 4 5 1 nwrap == 1 2 3 4 [5]
           | 1 2 3 4 5 0 nwrap == 1 2 3 4 5 []
    i      | 1 2 3 4 5 [+] i == 1 2 3 9
           | 1 2 3 4 5 [+ +] i == 1 2 12
    !      | 1 2 3 4 5 [+] ! == 1 2 3 4 5 9
           | 1 2 3 4 5 [+ +] ! == 1 2 3 4 5 12

    dip    | 1 2 3 4 [+] 5 dip == 1 2 7 5
    dip    | 1 2 3 4 [* +] 5 dip == 1 14 5

What you have to do.
1) Evaluate the following.
ghci> eval "5 factorial"
ghci> eval "1 2 3 4 2 nwrap [+] dip"

2)Can you write sigma of a given n i.e (sum 0..n)? Hint. look at factorial definition in initlib.
ghci> eval "5 sigma"
15

3) can you define the word nrotate that does the following

ghci> eval "1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 nrotate"
1 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 7
ghci> eval "1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 4 nrotate"
1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 5

@]

[@
> module Main where

> import System.Environment 
> import System.IO 
> import Data.Char

Parsing code: What it does is that it starts looking at a provided string, and
parses into a nested structure given by the data type "Nest". Our nesting is
provided by square brackets.

> import Text.ParserCombinators.Parsec

> type Word = String
> type Env = [(String, [Nest])]
> type Stack = [Nest]

> initlib = unlines[
>   "[succ 1 +].",
>   "[pred 1 -].",
>   "[even? odd? not].",
>   "[double dup +].",
>   "[half dup odd? [succ 2 /] [2 /] if].",
>   "[if* 2 nwrap [!] swap dip i if].",
>   "[zero? 0 =?].", 
>   "[factorial [zero?] [pop 1] [dup pred factorial *] if*]."
>   ]

Read a line and Parse it, returing the Nest data structure.

> readLine :: String -> Nest
> readLine input = case parse parseExpr "nest" input of
>     Left err -> error (show err)
>     Right q -> q

> eval :: String -> String
> eval str = unwords $ map show $ bigStep [] e []
>   where  Nested e = readLine (initlib ++ " " ++ str)

> evalFile file = do
>   str <- readFile file
>   return $ eval str

> main = do
>   fn <- getArgs
>   case fn of
>       [] -> error "Need file.nst to evaluate."
>       (x:xs) -> do res <- evalFile $ fn !! 0
>                    putStrLn (show res)

Parse a number of words or nested structures.

> parseExpr = do
>   x <- many parseSingle
>   return $ Nested x

Parse either a single word or a nested []

> parseSingle :: Parser Nest
> parseSingle = do
>   spaces
>   x <- (try parseFloat) <|>
>        (try parseInt) <|>
>        (try parseBool) <|>
>        (try parseString) <|>
>        (try parseWord) <|>
>        (try parseNest)
>   spaces
>   return x

Parse a nested structure starting with [ and ending with ]

> parseNest :: Parser Nest
> parseNest = do
>   char '['
>   e <- parseExpr
>   char ']'
>   return e

> parseFloat :: Parser Nest
> parseFloat = do
>   I i <- parseInt
>   char '.'
>   I j <- parseInt
>   res <- return $ (show i) ++ ['.'] ++ (show j)
>   return $ F (read res)

> parseInt :: Parser Nest
> parseInt = do
>   i <- many1 digit
>   return $ I (read i)

Parse a simple word without any spaces or nesting between them.

> parseWord :: Parser Nest
> parseWord = do
>   w <- many1 (noneOf " nrt[]")
>   return $ W w

> parseBool :: Parser Nest
> parseBool = do
>   (x:xs) <- string "true" <|> string "false"
>   return $ B (read (toUpper x : xs))

> parseString :: Parser Nest
> parseString = do
>   char '''
>   s <- many (noneOf "'")
>   char '''
>   return $ S s



Q1] Can you write the BNF notation for this language?

* A number is a sequence of digits

 <digit>   ::= 0..9
 <num>     ::= <digit>
             | <digit><num>

 <letter>  ::= a..z | + | - | * | / | < | > | = | .

We define char to be either a letter or a number (non white space.)

 <char>    ::= <letter>
             | <digit>

So that we can have words like dup2 that includes a number

 <word>    ::= <letter>
              | <word> <char>

A nest is either a number or a word or an expression of the form [ .. ]

 <nest>    ::= <num>
             | <word>
             | [ <nest>* ]

And ofcourse our expression is just a list of nests

 <expr>   ::= <nest>*

Q2]
Can you define the data structure required for a larger abstract syntax?
Currently we have,

> data Nest = W String
>           | I Int
>           | F Float
>           | B Bool
>           | S String
>           | Nested [Nest]
>   deriving (Eq)

> instance Show Nest where
>   show (W s) = s
>   show (S s) = (show s)
>   show (I i) = (show i)
>   show (F f) = (show f)
>   show (B b) = (show b)
>   show (Nested b) = "[" ++ (unwords (reverse (map show b))) ++ "]"

This is somewhat limited, We should atleast have a way to store real numbers (Float),
Strings like "hello world", and booleans like true and false. Can you extend our data
to add these things? Once you have done that, can you change the portions commented with
TODO to use these instead? (Hint, you can use (read x) to conver x to any of int, bool
or float from a string)
what does the expression below give you if you execute on ghci after doing the above?
readLine  " 'hello world' 'hi' swap concat "
Remember, we are defining our abstract syntax here. So readLine now prints the abstract
syntax of the line being read.
Q3]
Can you define the bigStep semantics of the given? See below for an example.

> bigStep :: Env -> [Nest] -> Stack -> Stack

Base case. Nothing on execution stack.

> bigStep _ [] r = r

BigStep semantics for literals. i.e integers, floats strings and nests evaluate to themselves.

> bigStep env (Nested n: xs) ys = bigStep env xs (Nested n: ys)
> bigStep env (I i: xs) ys = bigStep env xs (I i: ys)

implement the same for Float, Boolean, and String

> bigStep env (F i: xs) ys = bigStep env xs (F i: ys)
> bigStep env (B i: xs) ys = bigStep env xs (B i: ys)
> bigStep env (S i: xs) ys = bigStep env xs (S i: ys)

BigStep Semantics for addition.

> bigStep env (W "+": xs) (I i: I j: ys) = bigStep env xs (I (j+i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "*": xs) (I i: I j: ys) = bigStep env xs (I (j*i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "-": xs) (I i: I j: ys) = bigStep env xs (I (j-i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "/": xs) (I i: I j: ys) = bigStep env xs (F ((fromIntegral j)/(fromIntegral i)): ys)
> bigStep env (W ">": xs) (I i: I j: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (j > i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "<": xs) (I i: I j: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (j < i): ys)

> bigStep env (W "=?": xs) (I i: I j: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (j == i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "=?": xs) (S i: S j: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (j == i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "=?": xs) (B i: B j: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (j == i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "=?": xs) (F i: F j: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (j == i): ys)
> bigStep env (W "=?": xs) (Nested i: Nested j: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (j == i): ys)

> bigStep env (W "odd?": xs) (I i: ys) = bigStep env xs (B (odd i): ys)

> bigStep env (W "and": xs) (B a:B b:ys) = bigStep env xs (B (b && a):ys)
> bigStep env (W "or": xs) (B a:B b:ys) = bigStep env xs (B (b || a):ys)
> bigStep env (W "not": xs) (B a:ys) = bigStep env xs (B (not a):ys)

implement the same for - : if you have - a b , then the result of (a - b) should be on the stack.
      same for *. Can you implement it for division? (hint, remember to use F Float for result)

implement the same for dup  : duplicate the topmost element.

> bigStep env (W "dup": xs) (y:ys) = bigStep env xs (y:y:ys)

implement the same for swap : swap the two topmost elements.

> bigStep env (W "swap": xs) (y:y':ys) = bigStep env xs (y':y:ys)


implement the same for pop : remove the topmost element.

> bigStep env (W "pop": xs) (y:ys) = bigStep env xs ys

implement cons operator -- a:as in haskell

> bigStep env (W "cons": xs) (Nested y':y:ys) = bigStep env xs (Nested (y:y'):ys)

inmplement concat operator -- ++ in haskell

> bigStep env (W "concat": xs) (Nested y':Nested y:ys) = bigStep env xs (Nested (y ++ y'):ys)

implement empty? for a list.

> bigStep env (W "empty?": xs) (Nested y:ys) = bigStep env xs (B (length y == 0):ys)

Another operator is nwrap that takes an integer and pulls out that many elements in the stack into
a list.

> bigStep env (W "nwrap": xs) (I i:ys) = bigStep env xs ((Nested lst) : rest)
>   where lst = reverse $ take i ys
>         rest = drop i ys

Remember the i combinator?
that is 
[1 2] i + == 3
[1 2 +] i == 3
implement the i. - pull out the topmost nesting out of the stack and push it into the execution queue

> bigStep env (W "i":xs) (Nested v:ys) = bigStep env (v ++ xs) ys

implement ! it executes the statement on the stack non destructively.
1 2 3 [+ +] ! == 1 2 3 6
1 2 3 [+] ! == 1 2 3 5

> bigStep env (W "!":xs) ys = bigStep env xs $ (head res):(tail ys)
>   where res = bigStep env (W "i":xs) ys

We also need something called "dip" - an operator that pulls out the last element from the stack,
executes the current list on the remaining stack elements and puts the pulled element back. This is 
useful to provide a temporary place to store values. (see the example of if* to see how it is used.)

> bigStep env (W "dip":xs) (y:ys) = bigStep env xs $ y:lst
>   where lst = bigStep env [W "i"] ys

if then else

> bigStep env (W "if":xs) (Nested v2:Nested v1:B c:ys) = bigStep env (res ++ xs) ys
>   where res = if c then v1 else v2

Implementing definitions.

> bigStep env (W ".":xs) (Nested ((W w):as):ys) = bigStep ((w,as):env) xs ys

If not built in, look up in the environment.

> bigStep env (W x :xs) ys = bigStep env (def ++ xs) ys
>   where def = case lookup x env of
>           Nothing -> error ("Definition not found or is not applicable for word  {" ++ x ++ "} with stack " ++ (show ys))  
>           Just x -> x


@]
